+++ 
author = "Jonas Skånøy" 
title = "Problems Regarding Political Debates in this Day and Age." 
date = "2023-01-08" 
tags = ["🎓 Philosophy"] 
+++

In this blog post, I want to put out thoughts on the topic of truth. More specifically, I want to look at how the modern understanding of truth is a rhetorical tool, rather than something that is practical in our everyday life. My motivation for writing this is to get my thought out on paper, as well as to express my disagreements with Ben Shapiro and Jordan Peterson on this specific topic.

## Disclaimer

As I hopefully will make clear further on in the blog post, this is only my opinion on the topic, and I might lack nuance and insights on many of my points. Additionally, I am not trying to expose or completely negate all the points Mr. Shapiro and Mr. Peterson are arguing for, but I will propose an unusual way of approaching the truth than these two presents.

## The Current Problem on Truth

The main problem I find with figures appealing to truth nowadays is that they seem to push forward their political agenda, which diminishes the importance of truth being simple and easy to understand. Mr. Shapiro for example appeals to _facts and logic_, to portray himself as so-called “destroying” libtards and others of the kind. He calls out these so-called libtards for not knowing truth from falsehood, while saying that himself and his followers know the truth. But in doing so, he mystifies the practical bearings of the usage of truth, instead making it, as he says it “hard and based in facts.” By not addressing what he specifically means by truth, he makes the term ambiguous and hard to understand for a bystander, such as myself.

Mr. Peterson also appeals to the truth, though not to the same extent as Mr. Shapiro. Mr. Peterson sees truth as a necessary element of being virtuously good. He talks of truth as something that makes life more bearable than if you were to lie all the time. I get Mr. Petersons first point here. Being virtuous and truthful are, in a normative sense, necessary. However, it does not seem to me that truth has anything to do with making things _bearable_. Including that, Mr. Peterson talks about truth as something being present in our collective consciousness. This transcendental view of truth is ambiguous, mostly because of the term “collective consciousness,” which for me is extremely problematic. For: what constitutes consciousness at all? I do not see how it can be reduced to chemical build-up, because this seems too simplistic a model to describe the totality of human experience, and how _it_ relates to truth.

For me, truth is something different. It is not a statement about something in “reality” [^1]. Rather than that, truth can be understood as modus of how something can be in the world. It is a process, in which the said truth cannot be understood independent of the agent’s way of evaluating it. The agent, under such circumstances, cannot be abstracted from his or her environment when evaluating something to be true or false. Something is true given the right practical context, and it cannot be completely independent from human experience. It’s not beyond us, because it’s a rational evaluation of some state of affairs.

The main problem I find with so-called _truth sayers_, such as Mr. Peterson and Mr. Shapiro, is that of its use as a rhetorical means. It is not seen as something we use just to explicate something as being true, rather it is used as something hard and “real,” that some people possess, and others do not. To me, this has practical implications in numerous ways, but I cannot go into too many details here. I will however look at why this approach to truth is problematic.

If you use truth only as a power tool to appeal to a certain audience, all your achieving is polarization, instead of trying to understand the others perspective; finding common ground and being sincere with one another, instead of being at each other’s throats. It is only when you start to understand what people agree upon – beyond their political convictions – that you will understand the practical bearings of truth. It is not something to be found, it has always been there in our language. It is not some non-verbal entity, rather _it is_ an integral part of how we converse.

Of course, I am not with this dismissing undeniable proof about how the world was before humans came to talk and experience it, viz. the Big Bang. However, one cannot understand something about the world without the use of language. The world, experience and language are knitted into a large melting pot of the key elements that constitute our cognitive knowledge. But truth is nothing more than what linguistic users agree upon when trying to discuss sed experience, or sed world. It does not correspond to anything “real,” in the traditional understanding of the term [^2]

With all that has been said, I hope you will be inclined to take a step back from the on-going debates that are made to radicalize us, viz. the debates led by extremist groups. My intent is not to portray Mr. Shapiro or Mr. Peterson as representatives of extremist groups. People are entitled to associate with whoever they agree with. However, I see it as necessary to take a step back from what Mr. Shapiro and Mr. Peterson are trying to appeal to in a political sense, and think critically about their understanding of abstract concepts, such as truth.

[^1]: The reason I put “reality” in parentheses, is because I see it as imperative that we abandon the term, in hopes we find something better suited. Instead of understanding it as something separate and independent of us, I would like to purpose that it is rather co-dependent on the organism enacting in it. Reality thus, as I see it, is created in our interactions with other beings in the world and is a term we use to cope with our surroundings. It is useful to say something is a part of reality because it helps us paint our playing field for what possibilities we must work with within our world, from a cognitive point of view. However, if the term is used unconsciously, it only leads to more confusion and ambiguity. Therefore, with this, I hope I have made my point clear that I will _not_ be using the term reality in the traditional sense of the word.
[^2]: This view is primary fueled by Descartes distinction between what is internal, that being _res cogito_, and what is external, _res extensa_, of the subject. What is real in this picture is that some ideas can _correspond_ to the external world better than others. I simply deny this view and move on.
