This semester is going to be my final one as a bachelor student in philosophy! I am excited to get started, and whilst what comes after is uncertain, I am grateful for the chance I have been given to study something, simply because I like the subject. I am grateful for having a stable and safe family dynamic, who I can rely on both emotionally, but also with regards to practical manners. They have been supportive in my decisions from day one and have been a huge help for me in the process towards my own future.

With regards to creating my own path, both educationally, but also personally, I have been thinking of a talk I attended a couple of days ago. It took place at Studentersamfundet, and was held by Ole Einar Bøhn. There he talked about Nietzschean critique of the education system, and how current academia as it stands today lacks the so-called "forming" part of former education. This might be a strange term for my English readers, but if you consider the Norwegian words for education, it starts to make a whole lot of sense.

As Bøhn presented it, Nietzsche distinguished between what is called `dannelse`, which I translate to formation, and `utdannelse`, which is what we ordinarily think of as education. This distinction is important to consider, because it raises a significant question: what is the important part of one's academic education? Is it to help you, or is it to educate you? Most would like to think that it is a synthesis of both. However, I find the latter one, the forming part, to be of much more significance when considering the interest in developing more fulfilled and creative students.

Being educated takes you a long way, do not get me wrong on this. But being formed as an individual through intellectual investigations? I find that much more fulfilling story than working as some lousy 9-5 job and wage-cucking all your life.

Universities, now more than ever, have stream-lined a way that works in educating their students on a particular subject, but this is not a process the student has been involved in. Sure, he/her have decided the subject they want to attend, but they cannot choose how their own path education-wise that will make _them_ most fulfilled. Universities want people to just be good at the things they specifically choose to get educated in, nothing more, nothing less. I cannot say it better than Roger Waters did in Pink Floyds: The Wall; they want you to become another brick in the wall. Do your specific thing good and live happily with it. This is what the intellectual does. However, the intelligent person strives for something more than being a brick in the wall. They want to be an authentic version of themselves and strive for the goals which they created.

But I cannot see how this is fulfilling, there is so much more to life than abiding by what is expected by you. Our experience is contingent and finite and could be taken away from us at any moment. So why bother doing things in life that just get you by, when you can do stuff, you are passionate about or find interesting? I find it an absurd way of being to not do something other than what is expected of you. To be formed, you will have to make your own ideal and strive for it on the basis that you want to achieve it.

I have been rambling on for too long now, but I had to get this information out somewhere. Anyhow, I am grateful for the opportunity I have been given to do something with my life I do for myself, rather than to please the people or systems around me. One might say, with Nietzsche, that it is a part of my formation process, even though a formation process is continuously happening... (but that is a subject for another time).

I will apply for a bachelor's in programming next semester at NTNU in Gjøvik, which will be exciting. I must leave Trondheim. This city is choking me (metaphorically speaking of course), and I am in dire need of some fresh air. I need impulses from anywhere else but here, to fuel my own formation process. Who knows, I will find it fun to do something completely out of left field, like painting, or dancing? The doors are open, at least; all I must do is step through, even if uncertainty and anxiety set in.
